Hello and welcome back to the courts on deep learning.
Today we've got a very exciting tutorial here.
We're talking about long short term memory or else teams for short.
So let's get started.
It's actually going to be quite a saturated trial.
So we've got our own little plan of attack for today.
Today we're going to first of all look at a bit of history.
So where it came from what was the main idea behind it why people invented it.
Then we're going to talking about Ellis they asked him architecture.
There's gonna be the bulk of our tutorial today so be prepared for that and then we're going to have
an example walk through hopefully you'll have enough time for that as well.
All right.
So let's get started here we've got a problem which we identified in the previous tutorials.
We talked about the vanishing gradient problem.
So in short what happens is as we propagate the error through the network it has to go through the unravelled
temporal loop and as it does that it goes through these layers of neurons which are connected to themselves.
These hidden layers which are connected to themselves and they're connected by the means of a weight
called the W record the W recurrent weight and because this weight is applied many many times on top
of itself that causes the gradient to decline rapidly meaning that the weight of the layers on the very
far left are a bit dated much slower than the weight on the of the layers on the far right and this
creates a domino effect because the weights of the fire left layers are very important because they
dictate the outputs of those layers which are the inputs to the far right layers and therefore the whole
training of the network suffers and that is called the problem of the vanishing gradient.
And as a rule of thumb we could see here that if doubly records small then we have vanishing gradient
if w wreck is large then we have exploding gradient.
So now how do you solve this problem we've talked about we talked about a couple of possible solutions
we talked about clipping the gradient or penalizing the gradient for exploding gradients we talked about
smartly selecting the weights or the echo state networks which we didn't go into detail on for the vanishing
gradient and also we talked about the L stands for the vanishing gradient.
Just if you separate yourself from all of this information on all this theory and knowledge how would
you solve a problem like this.
What's the easiest and faster solution to it.
So if we have w req is in simple terms less than 1 then we have vanishing gradient.
If we have w req greater than one we've got exploding green what's the first thing that comes to mind
to solve this problem.
Well the first thing comes to mind is to make w recce call 1 and that's exactly what was done in the
LSD Ms.
This is a very simplified explanation and there's definitely more to it than just w rectangles one but
in general that's the idea and that's all it took.
And when I saw this for the first time I was so excited that you know the solution is so simple it's
really a genius solution and that completely gets rid of the vanishing gradient problem.
And so who are the people behind this.
Here are two gentlemen we've talked about separator.
And the second person is Jurgen Schmid Huber who is who was his supervisor during SAP's research or
pitch D.
And yeah.
So basically they wrote a paper on 9th in 1987 about the stamp and that's when Ellis jams were introduced
to Earth for the first time very exciting topic.
So let's have a look at what they actually are.
So we've got a recurrent neural network right here unravelled a temporal loop.
This is what it looks like.
If you dig in inside the recurring role rhetoric and right here I wanted to do a quick shout out to
Christopher.
All are.
So here is his blog right here.
Very well-written blog.
Amazing images as you can see.
And we're going to be using the images from this blog in our explanation here.
So thank you very much to Christopher for making this publicly available and allowing the use of his
images in other works.
So we'll definitely reference this at the end of today's tutorial.
And going back to our presentation.
So here we've got the recurrent neural network and this is what it looks like inside.
And this is where the problem lies.
So this operation that happens here is actually a neural network layer operation as we'll see further
down.
But simply put as you have outputs coming into your module into this module this operation is applied
and then goes into the next module the pressure is applied and so on.
So as you apply this operation when you back propagate it goes through all of this and that's where
the weights are applied that's where the W record's sitting as that weight is applied as it's applied
as applied the gradient vanishes vanishes and vanishes and that means that the weights cannot be updated
properly or fast enough to train the network properly and so the further away you try to look the more
promise you have in the more of the vanishing gradient you have this is the standard Arnon and this
is what the Ellis T M version looks like and I know you might be thinking that while this is super complex
this there's so much going on here.
And indeed it is a bit more complex than the standard Arnon.
But check this out.
This is how LSA teams are normally displayed in literature and in papers and so on and so definitely
this is the same thing as you saw before previous before but it's just a much more convoluted explanation
or representation.
So definitely this option is better and we're going to stick with this one and more so the it looks
it looks difficult now but the goal is that by the end of this tutorial you are completely comfortable
what's going on here and I think that's pretty exciting that this even though this might may seem a
bit complex now towards the end of the tour hopefully you'll be able to navigate LACMA quite well.
And so before we go deep into what's going on here then I wanted to highlight the main point.
So remember we said W Iraq equals one.
Well that's this line over here that pipeline at the top as you can see there's nothing not much going
on here.
There's only like two point wise operations as we understand for the done and there's no complex neural
network Laird operations they're all brought out to this bar and that's this is the essence if you're
going to take away one thing from today's tutorial that then this is that that you Dallas teams have
a memory cell it's called the memory cell.
I call the memory pipeline which just goes through time and this is us going through time and it can
very freely flow through time sometimes it might be removed and erased sometimes things might be added
into it but that's pretty much it.
Otherwise it flows through times freely and therefore when you back propagate through these Alice jams
you don't have that problem of your vanishing gradient that's that's the essence of Ellis stamps.
All right.
So now let's dig in in a bit more detail.
So we're going to replace these modules on the left and the right.
We have something more simple is going to replace them with our.
These representations so C stands for memory a memory cell I guess H is your output.
So there as you can see there's the output going out into the world and here you got your output going
into the next module into next block and then here you've got your input.
So basically this is the output from the previous module which also went into the world but also is
coming here.
So there we go.
So an Ellis team module takes in three inputs and has two outputs.
So C.T. NHT because these are the same and the important thing to understand and remember is that everything
here is a vector.
So all of these are this is not just one neuron not just one value.
There are lots and lots and lots of values here behind hiding behind this war this letter equity.
And here as well and here as well and everywhere.
These are all
layers.
So just remember that.
And we're going to reference them as vectors because that's pretty much same thing just lots of different
values in one vector.
Remove that and that will make it will allow you not to go down the wrong path in the intuitive understanding
of this just remember that these are all vectors and let's go through the legend.
So we've got vector transfers.
So any line here is a vector being transferred or kind of moving around in this in this in this architecture
and yes that's just kind of to reiterate that it is a vector then we've got a concatenation here.
So here you can see that there's two lines combining into one.
And important to understand that this is done here just to save space and make it less convoluted than
it possibly could be.
But the way the best way to imagine it is you that these two lines are running in parallel let you're
not actually combining concatenation means that you combine these two Xs on top of each other but I
think it's even easier to understand if you just think of it as in these they're two pipes running here
but they're running parallel to each other.
You've got one pipe and then goes here and the second pipe goes here then these same pipes go here and
then they attach that.
So basically you have two pipes running in parallel feeding into these neural network layer layer operations.
Then you've got copy.
So where do we have copy you have copy here.
The memories copies go straight ahead and just copy it over here.
Then this output is copied over here.
Then you've got point wise operations.
Now we get to the interesting stuff.
So you've got a couple of point wise operations here.
That's five of them and the first thing we're going to talk about these ones to access the Xs are evolves
and they all have names this is the forget valve.
The memory valve and the output valve and in literature you will see like letters F V and O in the actual
formulas representing these balls.
And so involved looks like this in the in the plumbing involved looks like this and we're going to kind
of think of it that way as well.
So you've got water or basically something flowing through and then you can either close it or you can
open it or you can close it to some extent.
Same thing here.
So you've got the forget valve is basically controlled by this layer operation and we'll talk about
that in a second.
And based on the output of that based on the decision made here this wall was either closed or open
so if it's open memory flows through freely.
If it's closed then memory is cut off and therefore it's not dozens not transferred further and then
new memory just is will be added here probably based on the results here.
Then you've got the memory valve which again is controlled by a Sigma Sigma stands for the sigmoid activation
function.
That means that that's activation function using these layer operations and as the decision is made
here this value which is another layer operation which we'll get to in a second is either added to the
memory or is somewhat added to the memory or is not added to the memory depending on the value that
is decided in this valve.
And then again another valve controlled by sigmoid is remember sigmoid.
Why we using sigmoid because they're from 0 to 1 and therefore 0 sense for no memory no nothing goes
through 1 stands for something goes through and then here you've got the valve which is the forget valve
since they are not the forgetful.
This is the output valve and we'll get to that in a second.
We're pretty sure you going through the whole network already.
So and then we've got the t shaped kind of like pipe or T shape joint it.
I'll show you where that is.
That is over here.
So where you have memory going through and then you can add additional memory so if you go back you've
got memory flowing through this joint and maybe some additional memory will be added into it maybe not
depending on the both.
And that's very much Ed you've got the tangent operation here that's this more kind of like mathematical
behind it why you wanted to be between minus one and one we won't get into details and that but that's
another point wise operation here you have and you've got the neural network layer operations over here
that's that's their representation.
So basically just think of them as you've got and you've got instead of point wise point wise like element
by element of a vector know if you want to multiply of extra by zero you multiply every element by 0
or by 1 or by a certain amount kind of think of it nowhere that's a very simplistic way to think about
these pointers operations whereas these ones are a bit more complex you've got a layer coming in and
then you going to layer coming out or like a layer because again everything here is a vector so you've
got a layer of these sigmoid is coming out controlling the valve for each one of these elements in the
vector of memory so there's not just one sigmoid there's many different and that's why you've got a
whole layer coming in and then you're going to layer coming on these are layer operations.
So just remember that.
And yeah.
So we're ready to look into this in in step by step and it's gonna be pretty simple because we've discussed
everything already in terms of how it works.
So we've got a new value coming in you've got memory you've got no memory you've got a value coming
from previous node and loops and together they are combined two to decide whether this file should go
should go ahead or should be closer should be open though it was somewhat closed or open then you've
got these two again combined together or not go combined again the flow in parallel and then they're
combined in in here or in this operation.
And and basically it's not just them combined it's like there's lots of layers here lots of layers here
one layer lots of neurons here not some neurones here and then all of that is basically in one layer
operation is used to decide what value we're going to pass through and then also if that value is gonna
pass through or not and to what extent then here we've got the memory flowing through we've got the
forget valve if it's closed or open we've got memory valve closed are open and we're adding in some
memory possibly if we want to update.
So basically we can let this whole memory flow through then keep this one closed keep this an open the
memory won't change.
Keep this one or we can keep this one close and keep this one open then we can update the memory completely.
And here finally we've got these two values combined to decide what part of the memory of memory pipeline
is going to be output he's going to become output of this module.
Is it going to go as fully as the output of it or to some extent and so on.
So again these decide that.
So that's how it all works.
Pretty straightforward architecture.
Let's have a look at a specific example.
To understand this a bit better.
So the example we talked about I'm a boy who likes to learn is some click that it achieved in translation
to check if this were were girl then.
Here he is Sam Holcomb.
There are the oh cheat meaning that these two words not just this word would change but also it would
affect these two words so different two in check rather than in English.
So these words are affected by the gender of the subject and therefore in our l esteem we might want
to store the subject boy in this case in the memory.
So for instance let's say boys stored here and then is just flowing through freely and nothing is changing.
Like if we GAF if our new information doesn't tell us that there is a new subject we just have boy flowing
through freely and keeps flowing again.
If for instance we have a new subject we have girl or we have we have a name like Amanda or something
else and we understand that we've got a new subject then Will's door will let this evolve will close
this while we'll say you know destroy the memory that we had then open this wall put a new memory and
then put the name here put the subject won't just put in the gender won't just put in like female we'll
actually put the whole as much information as we can.
For instance this could be the architect.
It doesn't have to be like this but as an example we could put in for instance girl now into this into
this pipeline and why would we do that.
Well because then from that we can extract different elements of information we can extract that it's
female we can extract that it's singular.
Right.
So not just that it's there there's additional information the word girl that is single we can extract
more information we can extract that the word girl for instance has four letters or that it was capitalized
it wasn't capitalized just as these are all very very intuitive examples that doesn't have to work this
way but this is how it could work.
And so then we have the word girl in here.
And so that's how this world works and this world works.
And so what this world does is it extracts certain information from what you have in the memories.
So for instance if we have now girl in here and for the purposes of the current of the next word or
next sentence that's coming up you might need to know like we saw you need to know the gender.
So then this valve will facilitate the extraction of the gender and that will go as an input into your
next module and it will help the next module.
It will be here decide and decide how to deal with the information that's coming its way how to put
it into the correct form for the female gender for example.
And so that's that's how the output valve works.
And what what it does.
So there we go.
That's how the long short term memory works and I hope this was a quite an intuitive explanation and
now you have a bit of a better understanding what what else dams are like in terms of additional reading.
You could definitely reference the original paper by our two officers who created Atlas dams.
Alternatively if you don't want to get that deep into mathematics and into the technical stuff there
is a great great blog by Christopher flow which we've already mentioned.
Great explanation of LSD Ms.
I highly recommend to check it out.
There's a bit of mathematics not too heavy and there's another blog by she young understanding I asked
him a SDM and it's diagrams diagrams are a bit more in-depth so they're a bit more there there's a bit
more or less space saving but Daniel has been more in depth.
Might be easier to understand in some cases no mathematics whatsoever just plain intuition and so also
highly recommend this blog to check it out if you would like to get a bit of additional information
on the stamps and on that note I hope you enjoyed today's tutorial and I look forward to you next time.
Until then enjoy deep learning.